Storage Docs / Notifications (#116)
rcgsheffield/Sheffield_RCC_Docs: ronin/drive-storage.rst

.. _drive-storage:

Drive Storage
=======================================

> Drive storage or block storage as it's often referred as is the storage attached directly to your :term:`instances<instance>` within Ronin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drive storage, or 'block storage' as it's sometimes more generally referred to as, is the storage attached directly to your :term:`instances<instance>` within Ronin.  
The other main type of stored available in Ronin is :ref:`object-storage`.  Drive/block storage offers better performance for both reading/writing data and also for file metadata queries, but object storage is cheaper and offers larger capacities.   

```

Author: Ignore my sometimes terrible grammar.

> These are most commonly the "Root Drive" however Ronin gives you the option to create your own additional storage to attach and move between instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are most commonly the 'Root Drive' however Ronin gives you the option to create your own additional drive/block storage devices that can be attached to instances and moved _between_ instances.
```

> These are most commonly the "Root Drive" however Ronin gives you the option to create your own additional storage to attach and move between instances.

Reviewer 2: Link to the relevant RONIN documentation so people can learn how to do this

Author: https://blog.ronin.cloud/storage-summary-help/
This?

We already link to a few docs from here https://docs.rcc.shef.ac.uk/ronin/index.html but It looks like it's worth adding.

Reviewer 2: Er, there's a few pages:

- [Managing storage drives in RONIN](https://blog.ronin.cloud/storage-help/)
- [Everything You Never Needed to Know About Drives, File Systems and Storage](https://blog.ronin.cloud/volumes-filesystems-storage/#em-classfas-fa-rocketem-resizing-drives)

Should you want to know about the nitty gritty, the underlying technology used here is `AWS EBS <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AmazonEBS.html>`_.

.. _drive_types:

Drive Types
---------------------------------------

When creating a new non-root drive, Ronin gives you multiple options for drive types.
As a general rule of thumb we recommend you select **SSD**, this is due to how AWS provisions drive speed.

> The SSD drives will be allocated 125MiB/s and 3000iops as per `gp3 defaults <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/general-purpose.html#gp3-performance>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SSD drives will be allocated 
* 125 MiB/s of read and write performance and 
* 3000 of IOPS ('input/output operations per second')
(as per `gp3 defaults <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/general-purpose.html#gp3-performance>`_).
```

> Should your workload require more performance please do get in touch.

Reviewer 2: I'd like a guide on using the storage-optimised machines properly please 😸 
Most of the data processing tasks for CURED are bottlenecked heavily by disk I/O so users being able to easily optimise this would save a lot of time

Reviewer: We could signpost to tooling that helps people quantify IO perf (on Linux and Windows instances - `iostat` and `iotop` for Linux).

A (mermaid.js) flow chart for diagnosing IO perf issues could be useful.

Reviewer 2: Yes please
I've collected a few [tips](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1y9Y1l5B1Vn0VW6-Ie4HP0QTq_CiH2tAcjUs5tW1v09g/edit?usp=sharing) but I realise it's probably a tricky topic for newcomers to grasp. There's a very wide potential variety of experience in the users - some extremely basic concepts to explain or at least signpost to relevant training
